Highbrow Herons – Grandmama's Teeth

We begin with a bird's-eye view of physiological and anatomical adaptations in various animals, which make them better adapted to their environment. This is the context in which we study the adaptation of the human body to speech and language. First, the vocal tract is dicussed – the various parts of articulation, and the rate of breathing are mentioned. Second, the brain and the division of functions between the hemispheres is noted. The point is made that quality is more important than the quantity of brain matter. Examples are given in support of this fact.
We then see the various processes internal to the brain which are responsible for speech production. The dependence of various processes on different parts of the brain is illustrated by the different types of aphasia caused by damage to different places. The importance of coordination between areas of the brain, over the actual locations, is emphasised.
Several aspects of the complexity of the entire process of speech are then detailed – planned articulation (with respect to sounds as well as words), and the "beat" or rhythm of speech. Here it is stated that one-sixth of a second is the basic time unit; while this is supported by some studies, by conscious effort we can slow down or speed up the rate of speech.
Next, cases illustrating the independence of language and general intelligence are described. This, I feel, bears out the improbability of Possibility 2 (as listed in the presentation by Morpheme) with regard to the human capacity for language.
We then see the factors language does depend on, as claimed by some studies. The (highly disputable, in my opinion) claim that women and men have consistently differing abilities in different areas is stated as an assumption; this is taken as the basis for the claim that language ability is affected by hormone levels. This, however, appears unlikely, at least at first glance.
The dependence of language on genetics is a little more established. The hereditary nature of dyslexia and the case of the KE family are given as illustrations of this. Environmental factors also probably enter into it; lack of exposure to language can severely hinder its acquisition. While Chomsky's principle of poverty of stimulus is well known, some stimulus is definitely needed; it is possible that a threshold of linguistic experience exists below which language acquisition is impossible. Other psychosocial factors such as home environment may have an effect too, although this is more debatable.
Finally, the possibility is explored that mirror neurons, which control empathy, play a fundamental role in acquisition as well, since the development of language in a child is dependent on observing others use it, as noted previously.
